# #tsh tsh -- quick and easy testing shell

## why

I got tired of: bash/sh portability issues; writing long, complicated, test
code; weird shell constructs for simple things; constantly putting in
`&>/dev/null`; and many more.

Sure you can write test scripts in any language, but for the kind of code I
write, I have to run lots of shell commands, capture the output, and check
that.

## aim

Less typing, less output.

Simple examples
[here](http://sitaramc.github.com/tsh/doc/tsh-examples.sh.html).

The test program for 'gitpod' is TAP compliant and can be found
[here](https://github.com/sitaramc/gitpod/blob/master/t/t01).  A syntax
colored version is
[here](http://sitaramc.github.com/tsh/doc/gitpod-test.html).

## requirements

perl 5.10.0 or later, and any posix shell that understands very simple
redirection.

## input

I assume you have read the [examples][ex] already.

### syntax

Input is one or more lines.

  * no arguments: STDIN is the input
  * exactly one argument which is a readable filename: its contents are the input
  * otherwise: the arguments themselves are the input
      * if an argument is multi-line, it is split at newlines
      * this is what you saw in the [examples][ex] section

Comments are allowed but not in the middle of a line (i.e., the whole line
needs to be a comment).  Leading whitespace is always thrown away, but not
elsewhere.  There are no continuation lines or include files.

Each line is one or more commands, separated by unescaped semicolons.

The only way to escape a semicolon is to precede it with a backslash.  Any
quotes are taken literally so don't try to use those to escape semicolons.
`TSH_VERBOSE=3` (or higher) will show the commands actually being run.

### hashhash comments (testnames)

Comment lines that start with optional whitespace, then `##` (two hash marks)
then whitespace, are treated as supplying the "name" of that test; see the
`error_list` function below.  This also serves as a progress report, getting
printed (prefixed by a "# ") to STDOUT as the test runs.

## functions available to perl

For **perl**, you call a function called `try()`.  A lot can be done by just
passing **tsh commands** (see later) to it, but there are some more functions
available if you need them.

The following functions get you more information:

  * `rc()` -- return code of the last external command executed
  * `text()` -- combined STDOUT+STDERR of the last external command
  * `lines()` -- same as text() but as a chomped list
  * `error_count()` -- number of errors in the last sequence of tsh commands
  * `error_list()` -- the list of "testnames" (see above) at which errors
    occurred
  * `tsh_tempdir()` -- the name of the tempdir that tsh automatically creates
    when needed

The following convenience functions are also available.  Their purpose is to
help you replace shell scripts as much as possible.

  * `put($filename, $var)` -- print the contents of the perl variable in arg-2
    to the file in arg-1.  The filename can start with a pipe character, which
    means it will then be interpreted as a process to pipe data to (but you
    *cannot* capture it's stdout or stderr).

    Examples

        put("$HOME/.foo.rc", $foo);
        # eqvt to: echo "$foo" > ~/.foo.rc

        put("| cat >> $HOME/.foo.rc", $foo);
        # eqvt to: echo "$foo" >> ~/.foo.rc

    (There is no `get()` function.  You can use backticks to get the same
    effect, although they cause an extra fork or two so it may not be as
    efficient as doing it in pure perl.  Patches welcome.)

## output

The **return value** fits the language used so you can use it as a boolean as
usual.  <font color="gray">This means the **actual** value is different in
perl and in shell, since they have opposite notions of what is "true" and what
is "false".</font>

STDOUT is only used for TAP related output (see TAP section later).

The 'try()' function prints nothing by default.  The 'tsh' command prints
nothing on success, but on failure it prints a very brief error summary (like
"3 error(s)") to STDERR.

In both cases, test-specific messages (see later) are printed to STDERR.

Also in both cases, the TSH_VERBOSE env var changes the output:

  * **0**: (for 'tsh') suppress even the error summary (only exit code).
  * **1**: print test failure messages and unchecked non-zero return codes
    (i.e., when an external command fails but its exit code is ignored).
  * **2**: print each line as it is read.
  * **3**: print each command as it is read.

(Setting it to 4 produces too much output to be useful most of the time).

## tsh commands in detail

### macros

Every command is first checked if a macro by that name exists.  Your current
list of macros is shown if you run 'tsh' without any arguments.  With the
default set of macros, for example, a command of `empty` will run `git commit
--allow-empty -m empty`.

The rest of the commands described below are checked only after this macro
expansion.  Macro expansion is attempted even on the result of the previous
macro expansion, so be careful you don't recurse.

### environment commands

  * `cd ...` -- does a chdir().  Without an argument it goes to `$HOME`.  If
    the argument is `tsh_tmpdir`, it is replaced by the name of the tempdir
    that tsh automatically creates when needed
  * `ENV foo='bar baz'` -- sets the env var foo

### testing commands

(Also see the TAP section below for the `plan` command).

  * `ok` -- checks that the previous command's rc was 0
  * `!ok` -- similar, except negated (check that the rc was *not* 0)
  * `/pattern/` -- check that the combined STDOUT+STDERR of the last executed
    command contained a string that matched the pattern
  * `!/pattern/` -- negated version of above

A note about the patterns: if you need to use `^` or `$`, please see the "perl
code" section later.

#### test-specific messages

In addition, each of these can be followed by the word 'or' followed by a
**test-specific message**, like so:

    ok or hey the last command failed

which results in the specific message being printed to STDERR, as described in
the "output" section above.

A variation of the test-specific message is:

    ok or die hey the last command failed so I am dying...

i.e., if the first word of the message is "die" then that test will cause an
immediate exit.  (If you're calling `tsh` from a shell script, your shell
script will of course still run -- it is upto you to detect the death of 'tsh'
using the exit status and do whatever you need to).

### perl code

**NOTE**: Avoid the temptation to put in all sorts of stuff there.  It's meant
to help do quick little tasks that would be horribly cumbersome in shell.  If
you find yourself doing more, you've misunderstood the purpose of tsh.

You can run arbitrary perl code; e.g.:

    tsh 'uname; perl $_ = lc; !/macos/ or we dont do Macs, mac!'

Perl's `eval` function is used.  Before starting, `$_` is set to the output of
the last external command.  The perl code should leave its own output in
the same variable, which will then in turn become the "output" of this
command.

The *return value*, on the other hand, reflects the success or failure of the
command being eval'd.

For this reason, note that `perl $_ = lc;` and `perl lc;` are *quite*
different.

Here's another example.  Say you wanted to check that *some* line in the input
starts with "foo":

    # this WON'T work
    tsh 'cat file; /^foo/ or die bad file'

The code above won't work because the input is all in one variable, so you
need a `/m` flag to make `^` and `$` work.  However, the simple code for
normal testing does not accept flags.

So if you really need that, try this:

    # this will work
    tsh 'cat file; perl /^foo/m; ok or die bad file'

This replaces the /pattern/ test with a 'perl /pattern/m' test, and then the
'ok' is used to test the success or failure of the perl code.

### git specific commands

  * `tt` -- step the commit timestamps by one minute
  * `dc foo bar [...]` -- do a dummy_commit of the file 'foo', then 'bar',
    etc., appending a fixed known line to each.  You can insert 'tt' among
    these arguments, (e.g., `dc foo tt bar tt baz`), to step the timer tick if
    you need that.

### miscellaneous commands

  * the `put` command prints the current "text" (i.e., the output of the last
    command) to STDOUT if no arguments are given, or to the filename if an
    argument is passed.  Like the `put()` function above, (1) the filename can
    start with a `|` character, and (2) you cannot capture this process's
    STDOUT or STDERR, though you can redirect them the normal shell-way.

    **WARNING**: this command may have some interpolation, quoting, and
    escaping needs.

    Examples:

        tsh 'cat example.gitolite.rc
            perl s/^\\s*($|#.*$)\\n//gm
            put ~/.gitolite.rc'

    This takes the sample rc file, removes all blank and comment lines, and
    puts the result in `~/.gitolite.rc`.

    **NOTE 1**: the `\` characters have to be doubled up; see warning above.
    If things don't work experiment with `TSH_VERBOSE=3` and look at the
    actual perl command being run -- perhaps a `$` or a quote character needs
    to be escaped.

    **NOTE 2**: don't forget the *whole* file is in one string, so you need
    the `/m` modifier to the regex substitution.

### external commands

Any command that is not one of the above will be treated as an external
command.

## TAP compliance

'tsh' is will produce `ok` / `not ok` lines if you run it from 'prove', or
indeed any harness that sets the `HARNESS_ACTIVE` env var.

You will need to supply a plan before the first test.  Just use the `plan N`
tsh command (where N is the number of tests you plan to run).

You may have guessed that the `plan` command is merely a convenience; if you
wish, you can check that variable and print the plan yourself.

Note: the ok/not ok messages do not contain the actual, correct, test number,
because tsh can be invoked multiple times from an outer shell script, and we
have no clean way to convey the running test number from one invocation to the
next.  This does *not* affect TAP compliance; at least it works fine with
`prove`.

"hashhash comments" (see above) are printed to STDOUT, prefixed by a "# ".
This is useful, for example, when running under 'prove -v', to serve as a more
user-friendly progress indicator than a series of 'ok' or 'not ok' messages,
while not affecting "prove" (without "-v").

[ex]: http://sitaramc.github.com/tsh/doc/tsh-examples.sh.html
